---
comments: true
id: 92
title: Can't seem to understand Math.floor(); method in javascript?
date: 2016-09-03
author: Robert J. Richards
layout: post
guid: http://robertrichards.me/js-math
permalink: /js-math/
categories:
- programming(Javascript)
---


`Math.random()` generates a real number less than 1 but greater than or equal to zero. The inequality that describes it could be written this way:

`Math.random() ~ { r | 0 <= r < 1; r is Real }`

The interval (range) could be written as,

`r = [0,1);`

From this we can see that when rounded down to the nearest integer, r will equal zero, and when rounded up it will equal 1.

The Math object has several methods, random() being one them, as well as three others that help with rounding:

`floor(), which rounds down to the nearest integer;
ceil(), which rounds up to the nearest integer; and,
round(), which rounds to the nearest integer.`

So we could reason that Math.floor(Math.random()) will always be 0; and, Math.ceil(Math.random()) will always be 1 (not so, see below); and, Math.round(Math.random()) could be either 0 or 1, depending whether r < 0.5 or not.

Now in programming it is important that we have consistency and a reliable measure of accuracy which would suggest that once we settle upon a method for rendering random integers, we stay with it. The most common form of random integer generation is the one you have discovered:

`Math.floor(Math.random() * 5 + 1);`

Technically, we could add the 1 outside of the function and get the same result.

`Math.floor(Math.random() * 5) + 1;`

Either way will yield integers from 1 to 5, inclusive. We can see that Math.random() times 5 will always yield a number less than 5, which when rounded down cannot be greater than 4. When we take the set, {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and add 1, we get {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}.

Now on closer examination we find that we can get the same result using Math.ceil(), without having to add 1:

`Math.ceil(Math.random()*5) ~ Math.floor(Math.random()*5+1)`

So why don't we do it this way? The answer may come as a bit of a surprise but is a reasonable one: If Math.random() generates a 0, it rounds up to, you guessed it, 0. This means that there are six possible outcomes for Math.ceil() above, and only 5 for Math.floor(), one of which is NOT zero. This is what we want. Make sense?

Let's look at their interval expressions:

`Math.ceil(Math.random() * 5) ~ [0,5]
Math.floor(Math.random() * 5 +1) ~ (0,5]`

For reasons similar to ceil(), round() is not used since it too can produce a 0 when we may not want one, or produce a number that is above the target range. We would have to write our expressions in such a way as to prevent this. In doing so we make our code confusing and double up on the number of potential errors and bugs.

[Roy](https://www.codecademy.com/en/forum_questions/520d13a2f10c609a79000efb)